Laboratory 25 X-Ray Microanalysis in the AEM
Purpose
The aim of this laboratory is to introduce the principles and practice of quantitative X-ray microanalysis in the AEM using an energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDS). Since it is important to recognize the limitations of the technique as well as the relative ease of quantification, some effects due to spurious X-rays in the EDS spectrum will be identified in the first experiment. More details may be found in PAEM, Chapters 4 and 5

Equipment
1. STEM equipped with an EDS system.
2. Software for quantitative thin-film analysis by the Cliff-Lorimer ratio method including an absorption correction.
3. Low-background specimen holder with beryllium or graphite specimen cup.

Specimens
1. Cr thin film evaporated onto a carbon film partially covering a heavy metal grid (e. g., 400-mesh gold) or heavy metal aperture (e. g., molybdenum).
2. Fe-Ni thin foil (or any alloy containing elements of similar z) fabricated by electropolishing or ion-beam milling.
3. Ni-Al thin foil (or any alloy containing elements of widely differing z) fabricated by electropolishing or ion-beam milling.
4. Biotite mica crystals (or any multielement specimen) ground and dispersed onto a carbon film.
5. Copper or nickel thin foil (or any simple metal/alloy foil with large grain size) fabricated by electropolishing or ion-beam milling.
Time for this lab session Two to three hours.

25.1 Sources of Spurious X-Rays
Ideally the X-rays reaching the detector should be generated only from the volume of the thin foil illuminated by the electron probe. Unfortunately, unwanted X-rays can also be generated. For example, spurious X-rays from locations on the specimen remote from the electron beam may be generated by high-energy continuum X-rays or uncollimated electrons from the illumination system of the microscope (the "hole count"), or as the result of elecuon probe-specimen interactions. These sources of spurious X-rays must be understood and minimized before quantitative analysis is attempted.
 
Experiment 25.1: The "Hole Count." Using the chromium film on the molybdenum aperture or gold grid specimen in the low background holder, observe the presence of stray radiation and/or electrons from the illumination system by comparing the spectrum obtained in the center of an open grid (the hole) square to that obtained on the chromium film. Ratio the full width AuLa or MoKa peak taken in the hole to the full width CrKa peak taken on the film and multiply by 100 to obtain the ”hole count."

Use a spot size (C 1 setting) that produces about 0.5 nA of probe current,° probe size = 2-50 nm depending on the electron source; "hard X-ray" C2 aperture = 50-70 um; objective aperture out; counting time = 100 live sec.

(a) Compare the hole count obtained with the thick platinum C2 ”hard X-ray" aperture to that obtained with a conventional thin aperture ( U' available). Record data on table below. The thick aperture should be used for the rest of this laboratory.
(b) Change to the smallest spot size but one and repeat the hole count. What causes the observed result?

Data sheet for hole count
Instrument:
kV:
STEM or TEM mode:
Emission current (uA):
Probe current (nA):
Probe size (nm):
CrKa window: keV to keV
AuLa window: keV to keV
Spot
Thick C 2 Live time Film CrKa Hole AuLa % Hole count size aperture? (sec) (counts) (counts) (Au/Cr)x10O Expt. 25.1 a Yes I Expt. 25.1 a No Exe- 2511>  11 


Experiment 25.2: Postspecimen Scatter.
Obtain a spectrum from the chromium film with the specimen holder at 0° tilt angle. Tilt the specimen about 30° toward the detector and observe any change in the count rate on the AuLa or (MoKa) peak. What are the causes of the difference in the count rate? Return to 0° tilt.
AuLa count rate at 0° tilt AuLacount rate at 30° tilt =

25.2 X-Ray Data Collection

Quantitative analysis requires a knowledge of the specimen detector geometry as well as accurate data for the number of characteristic X-ray photons collected from the specimen above background. Simply stated, quality analysis requires quality data.
 
Experiment 25.3: EDS Detector Position with Respect to the Image (for a side entry goniometer microscope only).

Insert the Fe-Ni thin foil specimen. Determine the orientation of the STEM image of the specimen by gently pushing the end of the specimen holder rod and noting the direction of image motion. The image will move along the axis of the specimen rod. From the location of the EDS detector on the column determine the direction of the detector on the STEM (or TEM) image. On which side of the specimen hole should the analysis be taken?
Note that there is no image rotation when the magniiication is changed in STEM mode.

The STEM image may be inverted with respect to the TEM image on some AEMs. When analyzing planar interfaces in the AEM, the interface plane should be oriented to point at the EDS detector. Why is this necessary?
 
 
Experiment 25.4: Collection of X -Rays.

Collect an X-ray spectrum using the following conditions: maximum kV; 10-nm probe size (thermionic source); thick C2 aperture;
objective aperture out; 50 sec counting time; specimen thickness which gives about 20% dead time. Determine the count rate in the FeKa (no need to subtract background at this stage) and note the dead time when:
(a) A lower kV is used.
(b) The probe size is doubled ( TEM/ST EM C1 current decreased; for DST EM increase size of virtual objective aperture).
(c) The probe size is halved ( TEM/ST EM C1 current increased; for DST EM, decrease size of virtual objective aperture).
(d) The C2 aperture size is increased (TEM/ST EM only).
(e) The C2 aperture size is decreased (TEM/STEM only).
Percent dead time  _
FeK,, count rate Return to max.
2 x probe size C2 aperture 1/2 probe size

Experiment 25.5: Background Subtraction.

Collect a spectrum from the Fe-Ni thin foil until the NiKa peak has about 11,000 counts in it, including the background. Obtain the Fe and NiKa intensities by subtracting the background using whatever method the multichannel analyzer (MCA) permits. Compare the intensities obtained by the computer with estimates based on subtracting the average background intensities in ” windows" on either side of the Fe and NiKa peaks.

25.3 Quantification of Data
The k-Factors for the Cliff-Lorimer ratio method may be obtained either by direct measurement on standards of known composition or, in cases where standards are unavailable, by calculation from lirst principles. Although the latter method is generally less accurate, it is often used in the quantitative software that manufacturers supply with the EDS system.
 
Experiment 25.6: Measurement of the k-Factor. Given that the Fe-Ni specimen is 49 wt% Ni, use the intensities obtained in Experiment 255 to determine the kpdv; from the equation:
QQ = /¢ _ [Ee CNi FeN1 [Ni  
 
Experiment 25.7 : Errors in k-Factor Determination. Assuming the composition of the standard is accurate to 1-2% relative, estimate the error in the k-Factor. Assume a "3 sigma" error in I pe and IN; where the estimate of the standard deviation s,, = ‘W and N = number of counts. Thus, Percent error in QE = 2%
CNi Percent error inéi = l--i %"x 100 + 3--' w X 100 [Ni NFe NNi Percent error in kpeNi = 2%. + L-MW 100 + §-_-%x 100 Nre NNi However, when the number of separate measurements is less than 30, a correction to the normal distribution, called the "student's t" distribution is used to estimate the error.
Repeat the determination of the kfactor using four separate and independent measurements and determine the error in kpdv; at the 99% confidence limit using the ”student’s t" distribution.°
- 15131 sn Percent error in k;=eNi = 1 1 x 100 W /<1=eNi where n = 4, r§‘§1 = 5.841 , and sn is the standard deviation calculated for four values of kpejvi of average value kFeNi.
Simple binary samples like Fe-Ni can be quantified without resorting to the computer, because of the ease of background subtraction and the lack of absorption. In fact a rough estimate to within il0%-20% relative can be made just by ratioing the peak heights or peak intensities. However, only integrated peak intensities should be used for quantitative analysis and multielement spectra generally require a computer.
 
Experiment 25.8: Multielement Quantyication. Test the accuracy of the quantification routines available in the MCA computer software using the specimen of biotite (nominal composition 17.3 wt% Si,' 15.1 wt% Fe,° 10.5 wt% Al; 6.3 wt% K; 5.4 wt% Mg;
0.9 wt% Ti, balance oxygen). In order to minimize absorption choose a thin flake, but try to obtain at least 103 counts in all major peaks to be quantified. H you have an ultra-thin-window EDS, then detect the oxygen signal also.

 
Experiment 25.9: Absorption Correction.

Using the sample of stoichiometric NiAl (33 wt% Al) obtain two X-ray spectra, one from a thin region and one from a thick region, each containing 10,000 counts in the AaKa peak. Using a kN;A1 value of 1.2, or the calculated value stored in the MCA/computer sojiware, determine the apparent wt% aluminum from each spectrum. Now use the absorption correction routine in the minicomputer to correct the data by choosing various thickness values until the correct answer is given ( to within iI0%).
 
25.4 Coherent Bremsstrahlung Effects

In addition to the small peaks that are artifacts due to the EDS detector (escape peaks, sum peaks, and the silicon internal fluorescence peak), the specimen itself may be responsible for some small unidentifiable peaks arising from coherent bremsstrahlung effects.

Experiment 25.10: Detection of Coherent Bremsstrahlung.
Tilt the copper or nickel foil sample to a low index zone axis, place a large probe (20 nm) on the specimen and count for 300 sec, making sure dead time is <25 %. Examine the spectrum, and account for all the characteristic peaks and EDS artifacts. Any small gaussian peaks that are unidentified may be due to coherent bremsstrahlung efects. Collect a spectrum under similar conditions but reduce the kV or change the specimen orientation substantially. The characteristic peaks and artifacts should not change position, but the coherent bremsstrahlung peaks will move. In what situations would coherent bremsstrahlun g peaks cause a problem for quantitative microanalysis?

25.5 X-Ray Emission Imaging (Optional)

Digital control of the electron beam allows reasonable elemental images or maps to be obtained from characteristic X-ray emission signals. The old X-ray "dot maps" usually did not have very good contrast between features in the image and the overall X-ray background, whereas digital X-ray images may be displayed in a background-subtracted form with excellent contrast. However, the signal from a thin specimen is usually about 105 times smaller than the signal emitted from an electron microprobe or an SEM. Thus, long dwell times are necessary to produce digital X-ray images, especially using a thennionic electron source (several hours may be required for a single frame).

Experiment 25.11 : X-Ray Elemental Image. Insert the Cr/Au grid hole count specimen. Set the EDS system to collect 128x128 digital X-ray images of chromium and gold with a 5 0-msec dwell time per pixel at 5000x or 10,000x magnyication. Go to an area where the chromium film covers only part of a grid square and the gold grid is partially in the image.
Start the digital X-ray image collection.
